docs: add announcement text for version 0.1 (#327)
ngi-nix/ngi-nix-forge: docs/announcements/version-0_1.md

# NGI Forge 0.1 released

We are excited to announce the initial release of
[NGI Forge](https://ngi-nix.github.io/forge/), our new software packaging and
distribution system for projects supported by the
[Next Generation Internet (NGI)](https://www.ngi.eu/) initiative via
[NLnet](https://nlnet.nl/).

> NGI Forge lowers the barriers of software packaging and makes it accessible to a

Reviewer: ```suggestion
NGI Forge lowers the barrier to software packaging, making it more accessible to a
```

> wide developer audience while preserving all the power of Nix.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
wider developer audience while preserving all the power of Nix.
```

Our most important goal is to build a platform which is both attractive and
accessible enough to be used by upstream NGI software authors. This will significantly

> increase sustainability of packaging, maintenance and usability of

Reviewer: ```suggestion
increase the sustainability of packaging, especially with regards to maintenance and usability of
```

> [many hundreds of supported projects](https://nlnet.nl/project/) and will also

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[those hundreds of NLnet supported projects](https://nlnet.nl/project/) and also
```

> help us to increase adoption of Nix.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
help us increase Nix adoption.
```

## Features

NGI Forge packages and applications are defined by human-readable, type-checked recipes

> (see [Mox package](https://github.com/ngi-nix/forge/blob/master/recipes/packages/mox/recipe.nix)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
(see e.g. [Mox package](https://github.com/ngi-nix/forge/blob/master/recipes/packages/mox/recipe.nix)
```

and [Mox application](https://github.com/ngi-nix/forge/blob/master/recipes/apps/mox-app/recipe.nix)).

> Currently we support packages written in C/C++, Python, Go, Rust and we will

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Currently, we support packages written in C/C++, Python, Go, Rust and we will
```

> extend support for other languages as we add more packages.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
extend support for other languages as we keep on adding more packages.
```

Applications support three runtimes: a **shell environment** for CLI and GUI
programs, **OCI compatible containers**, and **NixOS** for system services.

A nice [Web UI](https://ngi-nix.github.io/forge/) lets users browse available
software, explore available runtime options, and copy ready-to-use commands.

Recipes can be generated and maintained with AI assistance by following the instructions in the
[AGENTS.md file](https://github.com/ngi-nix/forge/blob/master/AGENTS.md).

> NGI Forge is built to be reusable for other use cases and is very easy to

Reviewer: Maybe we could mention here a couple of those possible use cases

Author: Maybe "use cases" is not the right word. I'll use other projects instead.

Author: Done.

> self-host using

Reviewer: ```suggestion
self-host using the
```

[Provider Flake template](https://github.com/ngi-nix/forge/tree/master/templates/provider).

> ## Future plans

Reviewer: Here, under future plans, one could add:

* Migrate already packaged software in NGIpkgs to Nixpkgs / NGI Forge.
* Create learning materials and onboard project authors through webinars.

Author: Done.

> * Add support for many more languages

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Add support for more languages and [application configuration via portable NixOS modules](https://github.com/ngi-nix/forge/issues/294).
```

Reviewer 2: @imincik Daniel is moving it here. Not removing the https://github.com/ngi-nix/forge/pull/327#discussion_r3131118434

Author: Fixed.

> * Add support for [application configuration via portable NixOS modules](https://github.com/ngi-nix/forge/issues/294)

Reviewer: ```suggestion

```

Author: Why remove this ?

> * Provide [development environments for upstream projects](https://github.com/ngi-nix/forge/issues/312)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Provide [development environments for upstream projects](https://github.com/ngi-nix/forge/issues/312).
```

# NGI Forge 0.1 released

We are excited to announce the initial release of
[NGI Forge](https://ngi-nix.github.io/forge/), our new software packaging and
distribution system for projects supported by the
[Next Generation Internet (NGI)](https://www.ngi.eu/) initiative via
[NLnet](https://nlnet.nl/).

> NGI Forge lowers the barrier to software packaging, making it more accessible to a

Author: ```suggestion
NGI Forge tries to lower the barrier to software packaging, making it more accessible to a
```

wider developer audience while preserving all the power of Nix.

Our most important goal is to build a platform which is both attractive and
accessible enough to be used by upstream NGI software authors. This will significantly
increase the sustainability of packaging, especially with regards to maintenance and usability of
[those hundreds of NLnet supported projects](https://nlnet.nl/project/) and also
help us increase Nix adoption.

## Features

NGI Forge packages and applications are defined by human-readable, type-checked recipes
(see e.g. [Mox package](https://github.com/ngi-nix/forge/blob/master/recipes/packages/mox/recipe.nix)
and [Mox application](https://github.com/ngi-nix/forge/blob/master/recipes/apps/mox-app/recipe.nix)).
Currently, we support packages written in C/C++, Python, Go, Rust and we will
extend support for other languages as we keep on adding more packages.

Applications support three runtimes: a **shell environment** for CLI and GUI
programs, **OCI compatible containers**, and **NixOS** for system services.

A nice [Web UI](https://ngi-nix.github.io/forge/) lets users browse available

> software, explore available runtime options, and copy ready-to-use commands.

Reviewer 3: I think you meant "recipe options"
```suggestion
software, explore available recipe options, and copy ready-to-use commands.
```
